International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC 2017)
Internet of Things (IoT)
A Vision, Architectural Elements, and Security Issues
Shivangi Vashi
Department of IT NMIMS MPSTME Mumbai, India
svashi1997@gmail.com
Saurav Verma
Department of Information Technology NMIMS MPSTME
Mumbai, India sauravtheleo@gmail.com
Abstract - The Internet of Things is an emerging technology across the world, which helps to connect sensors, vehicles, hospitals, industries and consumers through internet connectivity. This type of architecture leads to Smart Cities, Smart home, Smart agriculture and Smart World. Architecture of IoT is very complex because of the large number of devices, link layer technology and services that are involved in this system. However, security in IoT is the most important parameter. In this paper, we give an overview of the architecture of IoT with the help of Smart World. In the second phase of this paper, we discuss the security challenges in IoT followed by the security measures in IoT. Finally, these challenges, which are discussed in the paper, could be research direction for future work in security for IoT.
Keywords- Internet of Things (IoT), information security, identification, authenticity, RFID
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet of things as the name suggests, is the connectivity of everyday devices with each other. With the advancement in technology, numerous devices are using sensors, actuators, embedded computing and cloud computing. This has enabled communication between devices. To put it simply, the Internet of Things enables devices (things) to interact and co-ordinate with each other thereby reducing human intervention in basic everyday tasks. To get a better understanding of IoT consider the scenario of a smart home. As soon as the alarm rings it sends a signal to the coffee maker and the toaster, which automatically start doing their jobs without any human intervention. Thus, saving time and making our everyday tasks easy, this type of device communication is the Internet of Things. The IoT enables physical objects to see, hear, think and perform jobs by having them “speak” together, to share information and to co-ordinate decisions. A network of heterogeneous devices/applications has its own set of challenges. Moreover, as the communication among these
Jyotsnamayee Ram
Department of IT NMIMS MPSTME
Mumbai, India jyotsna1330.jr@gmail.com
Janit Modi
Department of IT NMIMS MPSTME Mumbai, India
janitmodi567@gmail.com
Dr. Chetana Prakash
Department of Computer Engineering BIET, Davangere Karnataka, India
chetana.p.m@gmail.com
devices as well as with related services, is expected to happen anytime, anywhere, it is frequently done in a wireless, autonomic and ad-hoc manner. In addition the services become much more fluid, decentralised and complex. Consequently, the security barriers in the Internet of Things become much thinner. The IoT architecture, like the Internet, will grow in an evolutionary fashion from a variety of separate contributions, rather than from a grand plan. Security is a major concern while dealing with the Internet of Things. A majority of IoT enabled devices are not very secure and can be accessed by a third party easily. Thus there is a severe need to standardise it to ensure that the privacy of the user is not invaded [1]. Research into the IoT field is still in its early stage, and a standard definition of IoT is not yet available. IoT can be viewed from three perspectives.
1) Internet oriented 2) Things oriented
3) Semantic oriented.
The first definition of Internet of Things was from a “Things oriented” perspective, where RFID tags were considered as things. It was defined as “The worldwide network of interconnected objects uniquely addressable based on standard communication protocols”. These definitions do not highlight the industrial view of IoT. Companies across the world are investing billions in the IoT to solve industrial problems (IIoT). The IIoT refers to industrial objects instrumented with sensors, automatically communicating over a network, without any human-to-human or human-to-computer interaction, to exchange information and take intelligent decisions with the support of advanced analytics.
The definition of things (as shown in fig.1) in IoT is very wide and includes a variety of physical elements. This network of a variety of objects can bring ample amount of challenges in developing applications and make existing challenges more difficult to tackle.
978-1-5090-3243-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 492

International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC 2017)
  Fig.1. Definition of IoT [3]
A middleware can offer common services for applications and ease application development by integrating heterogeneous computing and communications devices, and supporting inter- operability within the diverse applications and services running on these devices. A number of operating systems have been developed to support the development of IoT middleware solutions. They reside in physical devices, and provide the necessary functionalities to enable service deployment. The internet of things is not a single technology, it’s a concept in which most new things are connected and enabled such as street lights being networked and things like embedded sensors, image recognition functionality, augmented reality, near field communication are integrated into situational decision support, asset management and new services. These bring many business opportunities and add to the complexity of IoT [2].
II. IOT ARCHITECTURE
The Internet of Things involves a growing number of smart interconnected devices and sensors that are often non- intrusive, transparent and invisible. The communication among these devices as well as with related services is expected to happen anytime, anywhere and it is frequently done in a wireless and autonomic manner. In addition the services become much more decentralized and complex. Thus, to manage the complexity, IOT architecture is required. Architecture in this context is defined as a structure for the specification of a network's physical components and their functional organization and configuration, its operational principles and procedures, as well as data formats used in its operation (see fig.2).
Fig.2 Basic Architecture of IoT
Perception Layer: The perception layer is similar to physical layer in Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model which consists of the different types of sensor (i.e. RFID, Zigbee, QR code, Infrared, etc.) devices [10] and environmental elements. This layer generally copes with the overall device management like identification and collection of specific information by each type of sensor devices. The gathered information can be location, wind speed, vibration, pH level, humidity, amount of dust in the air, etc. This gathered information transmits through the Network layer for its secure communication toward central information processing system.
Network Layer: The Network layer plays an important role in securely transferring and keeping the sensitive information confidential from sensor devices to the central information processing system through 3G, 4G, UMTS, Wi-Fi, WiMAX, RFID, Infrared, Satellite, etc. depending upon the type of sensors devices. Hence, this layer is mainly responsible for transferring the information from Perception layer to upper layer.
Middleware Layer: The devices in the IoT system may generate various type of services when they are connected and communicated with others. Middleware layer has two essential functions i.e service management and store the lower layer information into the database. Moreover, this layer has capability to retrieve, process, compute information, and then automatically decide based on the computational results.
Application Layer: Application layer is responsible for inclusive applications management based on the processed information in the Middleware layer. The IoT applications can be smart postal, smart health, smart car, smart glasses, smart home, smart independent living, smart transportation etc.
978-1-5090-3243-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 493

Fig.3 Layer of the Internet of Things (IoT)
The typical IoT architecture can be divided into five layers as described below as shown in fig.3.
Business Layer: This layer’s functions cover the entirety of IoT applications and services management. It can create practical graphs, business models, flow chart, executive report, etc. based on the amount of accurate data received from the lower layer and effective data analysis process. Based on the good analysis results, it will help the functional managers or executives to make more accurate decisions about the business strategies and roadmaps.
III. IOT ARCHITECTURE IN SMART WORLD
We have smart devices [4] for humans that can be attached to the body to observe or maintain human health and fitness; these wearable smart objects are sometimes used to manage the human diseases as well. It is not limited just to human bodies and homes- IoT devices are applicable in restaurants, banks, hospitals, factories even vehicles. We can even make smart cities now. Controlling their urban environment like traffic controlling, smart meters and resource management, et al. All of things together make up the process of designing “THE SMART WORLD” where man power gets reduced and we have devices similar to robots that have artificial intelligence. All these situations can be controlled without wasting time and too many resources.
In a smart world scenario one country is connected to another with the help of IoT. The IoT architecture in smart world can be explained using the five layers.
Perception layer: In a smart world scenario, the collection of information like climatic conditions, economic conditions, migrations etc. from different countries, which is collected using various types of sensors like RFID, infrared etc., comes under the perception layer.
Network layer: For example, climatic conditions of all countries are collected in the perception layer, so, for processing the data the information collected is sent to the middleware layer using this network layer.
International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC 2017)
Middleware layer: All climatic conditions are stored in a database in this layer. The data is then retrieved and processed.
Application layer: Suppose, from the information processed in the middleware layer it is found that drought has hit an area. Actions like sending relief fund, food, clothes, materials for building shelter take place in this layer.
Business layer: Graphs, business models, flow charts etc. are made with the received information from middleware layer. This results in making better strategies, such as for the drought affected area how can food, relief fund etc. reach the area fastest and by what way should they send it are calculated here.
IV. SECURITY CHALLENGES IN THE INTERNET OF THINGS
The vastness of the Internet of Things (IoT) exposes it to not only a number of vulnerabilities but also different types of vulnerabilities/security problems. Since the internet is the underlying foundation of IoT, the security issues of the internet also appear in IoT. IoT has three main layers - the perception layer, transportation layer and the application layer. Each layer has its own security problems.
A) Security challenges in the main layers of IoT: a) Perception Layer:
The main operation of the perception layer is perceiving and gathering information. This is done by devices like temperature sensors, pressure sensors, RFIDs, barcodes and so on. The wireless nature of the signals makes this layer susceptible to attackers who may intercept the sensor node in the IoT devices. The nodes usually operate in an external environment and this culminates in physical attacks on IoT sensors and devices in which an attacker can tamper with the hardware components of the device [5]. Gathering information or the perception of things is done by a large number of terminals. These terminals are used for real-time data collection to be presented to the user. The main problems existing in perception terminals include leakage of confidential information, tampering, terminal virus, copying and other issues.
Another security issue is the inherent nature of network topology which is dynamic as the IoT nodes are often moved around different places. The IoT perception layer mostly consists of sensors and RFIDs [6], due to which their storage capacity, power consumption, and computation capability are very limited making them susceptible to many kinds of threats and attacks [5]. By adding another node to the system, an attacker can send Malicious Data and threaten the integrity of the data. This can cause DoS attacks, by consuming the energy of the nodes in the system and depriving them from the sleep mode that the nodes use to save up energy [5].
 978-1-5090-3243-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 494

These security issues can be dealt with using encryption; authentication, confidentiality and access control.They are given in detail in Security Measures Section below.
b) Transportation Layer:
It is also called the network layer. The function of this layer is to relay the information collected by the perception layer to any to any particular information processing system through existing communication networks like the Internet, a mobile network[15] or any other kind of reliable network. Since the information used to be transmitted to the internet with the help of computers, wireless/wired network and other components, this layer is largely comprised of computers, wireless or wired network. Due to this, it faces security issues such as network content security, hacker intrusion and illegal authorization. The openness characteristic of IoT makes it face many identity authentication problems[7].
The transportation layer is an essential part in the whole IoT system. One of the inherent characteristics of IoT is the huge amount of data flowing through the layers. When the sensor nodes from the perception layer perceive and are gathering data, they inevitably produce a large amount of redundant data. This will cause network congestion in the process of transmission, which likely to generate denial of service attacks. For this, we must add the filtration devices between the transmission layer and the application layer to ensure the network is unblocked [8].
The related security issues are discussed below:
1. Sybil Attack: Sybil is a kind of attack in which the attacker manipulates the node to present multiple identities for a single node due to which a considerable part of the system can be compromised resulting in false information about the redundancy.
2. Sinkhole Attack: It is a kind of attack in which the adversary makes the compromised node look attractive to the nearby nodes, due to which all the data that flow from any particular node is diverted towards the compromised node. These results in packets drop i.e. all the traffic is silenced while the system is fooled to believe that the data has been received on the other side. Moreover this attack results in more energy consumption which can cause DoS attack.
3. Sleep Deprivation Attack: The sensor nodes in the Wireless Sensor Network are powered with batteries with a not so good lifetime so the nodes are bound to follow the sleep routines to extend their lifetime. Sleep Deprivation is the kind of attack which keeps the nodes awake, resulting in more battery consumption and as a result, battery lifetime is minimized which causes the nodes to shut down.
4. Denial of Service (DoS) Attack: The kind of attack in which the network is flooded with a useless lot of traffic by an attacker, resulting in a resource exhaustion of the targeted system due to which the network becomes unavailable to the users.
5. Malicious code injection: This is a serious kind of attack in which an attacker compromises a node to inject malicious code into the system which could even result in a complete shutdown of the network or in the worst case, the attacker can get a full control of the network.
6. Man-in-the-Middle Attack. This is a form of Eavesdropping in which the target of the attack is the communication channel due to which the unauthorized party can monitor or control all the private communications between the two parties hideously. The unauthorized party can even fake the identity of the victim and communicate normally to gain more information.
c) Application Layer
The main function of the application layer is to analyse the information acquired from the transportation layer and process it intelligently. The application layer is the main purpose of developing IoT and the smart environment is achieved at this layer. This layer guarantees the authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality of the data [5]. At this layer we can get some important real-time information.
The related security issues of this layer are described below:
1. Malicious Code Injection: An attacker can leverage the attack on the system from end-user with some hacking techniques that allows the attacker to inject any kind of malicious code into the system to steal some kind of data from the user [11].
2 Denial-of-Service (DoS) Attack : DoS attacks nowadays have become sophisticated, it offers a smoke screen to carry out attacks to breach the defensive system and hence data privacy of the user, while deceiving the victim into believing that the actual attack is happening somewhere else[11]. This put the non-encrypted personal details of the user at the hands of the hacker.
3. Spear-Phishing Attack: It is an email spoofing attack in which victim, a high ranking person, is lured into opening the email through which the adversary gains access to the credentials of that victim and then by pretense retrieves more sensitive information[11].
4. Sniffing Attack: An attacker can force an attack on the system by introducing a sniffer application into the system, which could gain network information resulting in corruption of the system [11].
V. IOT SECURITY MEASURES
1. Encryption: Encryption is used to prevent the data from being tampered with and to maintain confidentiality as well as data integrity. Encryption can be achieved in two ways: either node to node, i.e. hop to hop encryption or end to end encryption. Node to node encryption processed in the network layer. It provides cipher text conversion on each node to make it more secure for network layer. On the other hand, end to end encryption is executed on the application layer. Encryption-decryption is performed at sender-receiver end only. What the sender encrypts is decrypted at the receiving
International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC 2017)
978-1-5090-3243-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 495

end only. Data encryption is a vital means of securing data. The role of encryption is to prevent information from being deciphered when it is intercepted by attackers.
2. Confidentiality: It is very important that the data is secure and accessible only to authorized users. The user may be human, other IoT devices or external devices (i.e. devices that are not part of the network). It is important to ensure that the sensors in a particular node don’t allow the collected data to be accessed by neighboring nodes. Sensitive information should not be leaked to any unauthorized reader using an RFID electronic tag.
3. Authentication: Received information by a reader should be noticeable whether is sent from authenticated electronic tag or not. Authentication is important at each IoT layer. At the perception layer, the sensor nodes must authenticate themselves initially to prevent DoS attacks. Similarly authentication is required at each layer as a crucial security measure. Authentication methods of Wi-Fi to access the Internet can guarantee the security of user access to the data [5].OpenID is a standardised framework for authentication purposes. It provides a way for a site to redirect a user somewhere else and come back with a verifiable assertion.
4. Authorisation: Authorisation controls a device's access throughout the network. Using authentication and authorisation the relationship between IoT devices is established to exchange appropriate information.OAuth is a standardized framework for authorisation purposes. The most important feature of OAuth is the access token which provides a long lasting method of making additional requests. Unlike OpenID, OAuth does not end with authentication but provides an access token to gain access to additional resources provided by the same third-party service.
One challenge faced by OAuth and Connect is that they have only been bound to HTTP thus far. Security experts believe that HTTP is insufficient for many of the interactions in the IoT, particularly those between IoT devices. A new class of protocols has emerged that promise to be better suited than HTTP to such interactions, including MQ Telemetry Transport and Constrained Application Protocol.
5. Certification and Access Control: Certification is a method of confirming the true identity of both entities that are communicating with each other. By using Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), strong authentication is achieved by two way public key certification for preventing authenticity and confidentiality of the IoT system [3].Access control provides security by effectively blocking access for machines, objects or people which are illegal to access the resources [3]. For effective access control correct entity identification must be ensured using certification technology.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The Internet of things is the future for the coming decades which helps in developing the Smart World where everything is connected to one network. As security is always a big problem across every system but in IoT it is the most important area in which we need to work to secure data or information which is on one connected network. One of the fundamental elements in securing an IoT infrastructure is around device identity and mechanisms to authenticate. So to overcome on these securities of IoT devices strong encryption and authentication schemes are based on cryptographic need to design and new security protocols are required. In this paper, we explained the security issues in each layer and its measures which help us to understand and to improve security in IoT architecture. Smarter security systems that include managed threat detection, anomaly detection, and predictive analysis need to evolve. All the above discussed issues will be research opportunities in IoT security.
VII. REFERENCES
[1] Ala Al-Fuqaha , Mohsen Guizani , Mehdi Mohammadi “Internet of things: a survey and enabling technologies, protocols and application” IEEE Communication Surveys & Tutorials, Vol. 17, No. 4, Fourth Quarter 2015.
[2] Mohammad AbdurRazzaque, MarijaMilojevic-Jevric, Andrei Palade, and Siobhán Clarke , “Middleware for Internet of things: a survey”, IEEE Internet Of Things Journal, Vol. 3, No. 1, February 2016
[3] P. F. HaraldSundmaeker, P. Guillemin, and S. Woelfflé, “Vision and Challenges for Realising the Internet of Things” Pub. Office, EU, 2010.
[4] H. Schaffers, N. Komninos, M. Pallot, B. Trousse, M. Nilsson, and A.
Oliveira, “Smart cities and the future internet: Towards cooperation frameworks for open innovation,” The Future Internet, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 6656, pp. 431–446, 2011
[5] Rwan Mahmoud, Tasneem Yousuf, Fadi Aloul and Imran Zualkernan
“Internet of Things (IoT) Security: Current Status, Challenges and Prospective Measures”, in 10th International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions, 2015.
[6] Xu Xiaohui, “Study on Security Problems and Key Technologies of The Internet of Things”, International Conference on Computational and Information Sciences, 2013.
[7] Mayuri A. Bhabad and Sudhir T. Bagade , “Internet of Things: Architecture, Security Issues and Counter measures”, International Journal of Computer Applications,2015.
[8] Xue Yang, Zhihua Li, Zhenmin Geng and Haitao Zhang ,“Internet of Things” International Workshop, IOT 2012, Changsha, China, August , 2012.
[9] Qi Jing, Athanasios V. Vasilakos, Jiafu Wan, Jingwei Lu and Dechao Qiu,
“Security of the Internet of Things: perspectives and challenges”, Wireless Netw ,2014.
[10] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A survey,”Comput. Netw., vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, Oct. 2010.
[11] M.U. Farooq,Muhammad Waseem ,Anjum Khairi,Sadia Mazhar"A Critical Analysis on the Security Concerns ofInternet of Things (IoT)",International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 8887,Volume 111 - No. 7, February 2015.
International conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC 2017)
978-1-5090-3243-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 496
